Getting Started
===============

Installation
------------
You can install ``pybnb`` with ``pip``:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install pybnb

``pybnb`` requires ``mpi4py`` to solve problems in
parallel. However, it will also solve problems in serial if
this module is not available. Thus, ``mpi4py`` is not listed
as a package requirement, and it may need to be installed in
a separate step.

Defining a Problem
------------------

To define a branch-and-bound problem with ``pybnb``, one
must define a class that implements the :class:`pybnb.Problem
<pybnb.problem.Problem>` interface, which includes defining
the six required methods shown below.

.. code-block:: python

    import pybnb
    class MyProblem(pybnb.Problem):
       ...
       def sense(self): ...
       def objective(self): ...
       def bound(self): ...
       def save_state(self, node): ...
       def load_state(self, node): ...
       def branch(self, parent_node): ...

.. note::
    The :class:`pybnb.Problem <pybnb.problem.Problem>` base
    class is a purely abstract interface that adds no
    additional data to a problem implementation. It is not
    required to call ``Problem.__init__`` when defining the
    ``__init__`` method on a derived class.

The remainder of this section includes a detailed
description for each of these methods.

 - :func:`Problem.sense() <pybnb.problem.Problem.sense>`

   This is the easiest method to define for a
   branch-and-bound problem. It should return the objective
   sense of the problem, which should always be one of
   :obj:`pybnb.minimize <pybnb.common.minimize>` or
   :obj:`pybnb.maximize <pybnb.common.maximize>`, and should
   not change what it returns over the lifetime of a
   problem. For instance, to define a problem with an
   objective value that should be minimized, the
   implementation would look something like:

   .. code-block:: python

       class MyProblem(pybnb.Problem):
          def sense(self):
              return pybnb.minimize

   The :class:`pybnb.Problem <pybnb.problem.Problem>` base
   class defines two additional convenience methods
   :func:`pybnb.Problem.infeasible_objective()
   <pybnb.problem.Problem.infeasible_objective>` and
   :func:`pybnb.Problem.unbounded_objective()
   <pybnb.problem.Problem.unbounded_objective>` that return
   `+inf` or `-inf`, depending on the return value of
   :func:`sense() <pybnb.problem.Problem.sense>`.

 - :func:`Problem.bound() <pybnb.problem.Problem.bound>`

   This method should return a valid bound for the objective
   function over the current problem domain (as defined by
   the current problem state).

 - :func:`Problem.objective() <pybnb.problem.Problem.objective>`

   This method should return a value for the objective
   function that is feasible for the current problem domain
   (as defined by the current problem state), or it can
   return a value that is worse (as defined by the problem
   sense) than any feasible objective for the current
   problem domain (e.g., :func:`self.infeasible_objective()
   <pybnb.problem.Problem.infeasible_objective>`).

 - :func:`Problem.save_state(node) <pybnb.problem.Problem.save_state>`

   This method should save any relevant state information
   about the problem into the numeric :attr:`state
   <pybnb.node.Node.state>` array on the node argument. The
   amount of available storage in this array can be adjusted
   by calling the :func:`resize() <pybnb.node.Node.resize>`
   method on the node.

 - :func:`Problem.load_state(node) <pybnb.problem.Problem.load_state>`

   This method should load the problem state stored inside
   the numeric :attr:`state <pybnb.node.Node.state>` array
   on the node argument. For instance, a pair of
   :func:`save_state <pybnb.problem.Problem.save_state>` and
   :func:`load_state <pybnb.problem.Problem.load_state>`
   implementations might look like:

   .. code-block:: python

       class MyProblem(pybnb.Problem):
           def __init__(self):
               self._xL = 0.0
               self._xU = 1.0
           def save_state(self, node):
               node.resize(2)
               node.state[0] = self._xL
               node.state[1] = self._xU
           def load_state(self, node):
               assert len(node.state) == 2
               self._xL = float(node.state[0])
               self._xU = float(node.state[1])

 - :func:`Problem.branch(parent_node) <pybnb.problem.Problem.branch>`

   This method should partition the problem domain defined
   within the user state on the `parent_node` object into
   zero or more child states and return them as new node
   objects. A child node should be created by calling
   :func:`parent_node.new_child()
   <pybnb.node.Node.new_child>`. Note that for the branching
   process to make sense in the context of a
   branch-and-bound solve, the bound computed from the child
   node states should improve (or not be worse than) the
   bound for the parent node. Once the child bound is
   computed, if it is found to be worse than the bound from
   the parent node, then the branch-and-bound solver will
   issue a warning, as this is likely indicative of a
   programming error or other numerical issues.

   When this method is called, the :attr:`parent_node.bound
   <pybnb.node.Node.bound>` and :attr:`parent_node.objective
   <pybnb.node.Node.objective>` attributes will have been
   set to the value returned from :func:`Problem.bound()
   <pybnb.problem.Problem.bound>` and
   :func:`Problem.objective()
   <pybnb.problem.Problem.objective>`, respectively.  Any
   child nodes returned from :func:`parent_node.new_child()
   <pybnb.node.Node.new_child>` will inherit this bound and
   objective, which may affect their prioritization in the
   global work queue. As user can assign a new value to one
   or both of these attributes before returning a child
   node.

Solving a Problem
-----------------

There are two approaches to solving a branch-and-bound
problem with ``pybnb``. The first is to simply call the
convenience function :func:`pybnb.solve
<pybnb.solver.solve>`, and the second is to create a
:class:`pybnb.Solver <pybnb.solver.Solver>` object and call
the :func:`Solver.solve <pybnb.solver.Solver.solve>` method.

Both approaches can solve a problem in serial or
parallel. The difference between the two approaches is that
the :func:`pybnb.solve <pybnb.solver.solve>` function
provides a few additional keywords that simplify the process
of saving solver output and results to a file. Additionally,
this function collects and reports workload and timing
statistics for the solve, which can add some overhead. These
statistics are not collected by the :func:`Solver.solve
<pybnb.solver.Solver.solve>` method, thus, the second
approach of directly using a :class:`pybnb.Solver
<pybnb.solver.Solver>` object can be used to avoid this
overhead. There is also some overhead associated with
creating a :class:`pybnb.Solver <pybnb.solver.Solver>`
object , but once created the :func:`Solver.solve
<pybnb.solver.Solver.solve>` method can be called any number
of times.
